The last two years for
Apple has been really exciting
from a hardware perspective.
We've totally revamped our product line.
Similarly,
we've totally revamped our I/O.
For low-speed I/O,
we've gone from serial and ADB to USB.
For high-speed,
we've gone from SCSI to FireWire.
For analog video in and out,
we've gone to digital video
in and out over FireWire.
About two years ago when
I was standing up here,
we had one FireWire PCI card that
you can put into your Bage G3,
and that was it.
Last year, we had just started shipping
the blue and white G3,
so that was one product that
came standard with FireWire.
We had a few ports out there,
so developers were just
beginning to adopt it.
Today, if you see the product line,
about 70% of Apple's products
come standard with FireWire.
Three out of the four product lines,
every customer that buys it gets a
FireWire port whether he likes it or not.
Well, that's a big opportunity for you
to make devices to plug it in.
And we've got a lot of good feedback from
you and a lot of good response from both
customers and developers that like this.
So let's see what's been
happening in the last year or two.
There have been new
peripherals in every category.
So scanners, printers,
lots of mass storage of course, CDRWs,
hard drives, MOs, you name it,
and there are several
products in the category.
Actually,
there are about 100 FireWire peripherals,
excluding DV camcorders,
that have already been announced
and about 60 of them shipping.
It's been a really big deal in storage.
I mean, you see hard drives,
really cool ones,
the small pocket ones from the CNVST,
big ones, high capacity,
you're seeing RAIDs.
Here are a couple of
solutions that are really hot.
The pocket-sized drives
from both the CNVST,
I think they were a big hit.
It was just awesome.
In fact, these have two ports on them.
They have both FireWire
ports as well as USB ports.
So that's kind of cool.
Here's a new product from Micronet.
This is the SAN cube.
It's a FireWire RAID array.
So they've taken multiple
drives and put it in.
And they've got multiple, four, I think,
four or five FireWire ports on it.
But the cool thing about this is not
only can you use it as a RAID drive,
you can connect multiple hosts to it.
Remember,
FireWire is a multi-host topology.
So you can have two or up to
four Macs connected to this box,
and all of them can be accessing the
data that's sitting on this drive.
So that's a pretty cool product.
VST, RAID array, really portable.
It's got a battery up there.
You can have up to 100 gigs of
storage in this portable thing.
Perfect complement for
somebody using a PowerBook.
that come with FireWire for
digital video on the road.
Here's another cool product,
a DVD changer from Eshant.
Well, this is basically two
DVD ROM drives in this box,
and it's got a 200-disc carousel.
So you can put all your 200,
up to 200 DVDs in here,
and you can load two at a time.
So this is another cool product.
Scanners, UMAX and Epson are shipping
high-end scanners right now.
And I think what we are going
to start seeing is products like
scanners and digital cameras.
the price points drop quickly.
So, I often get asked this question
from developers saying,
"Oh, I have a product.
Should I do it with a
USB product or should I make
it a FireWire product?" Well,
that really depends on,
I think the main thing it
depends on is the performance
that your product requires,
right?
We know that USB, theoretical,
is a 1.5 megabyte per second bus,
that's 12 megabits per second,
but it really maxes out at
about 1 megabyte per second.
Very often, customers have got many
USB devices attached to the bus.
Somebody can have a
printer and a scanner,
a mass storage device like a
Zip or a hard drive or whatever.
You're going to start seeing
USB DSL modems and things like that.
So maybe somebody will be
browsing the internet at the
same time he's downloading a file
or scanning a file or whatever.
So, when that happens,
the total bandwidth to a single device,
of course, is going to drop.
So you really need to weigh at what
point do you make that switch from
a USB device to a FireWire device.
And we think that's probably
around 800k per second.
So if your device is doing more than 600,
700, 800k per second, make the switch,
right?
Because the customer really sees
a benefit from using FireWire.
Of course, FireWire has added
advantages like bus power,
and we'll talk a little bit
about that a little later on.
So just to talk a little
bit about performance,
I've got a demo for you.
If you could switch.
I have this new drive from VST.
It's got both FireWire ports,
two FireWire ports, and a USB port.
So what I'm going to do is,
let's copy a big file over.
I have my PowerBook.
So first thing you notice is
that I have to plug it in.
So I plug it in.
When I say plug it in,
I mean I plug it into the wall.
And I plug in the USB port.
So I'm going to first do
a USB performance number.
So there it mounts.
I've got this huge,
it's about a 29-meg file.
If I do get info, it says 29 megs.
So let's do a duplicate.
So you see it's not very fast.
It takes about, let's say,
it'll probably be a minute or two,
so I can yap for two minutes more.
And then after that we'll run
the same thing on FireWire.
So a couple more devices are
starting now to show up that were
USB and are now going to FireWire.
For example, iOmega has the new Zip 250,
and they've come up with this cool
FireWire dongle that you just plug it in.
They have an ATA interface at the back,
so you get all the benefits of
FireWire by just plugging it in.
Again, it's bus-powered and a
single FireWire port.
On USB, this drive does about a megabyte,
a little less than a megabyte,
800k per second.
On FireWire,
this does about 2 megabytes a second,
and it's bus-powered.
So there's a real improvement in
the customer experience when using
this on FireWire as opposed to USB.
So my copy is about...
Halfway done.
Should we put it out of its misery?
Okay, so I hit stop.
There we go.
So you get the idea.
Let's now take the same device.
I'm going to drag it to the trash.
Unplug the USB ports.
So now on FireWire, of course,
I don't need to plug in any power.
Just plug it in.
In a second or two it should mount.
There we go.
And let's just duplicate this file.
So probably about five seconds.
So here's an example where a
really fast device gets a huge
advantage on going to FireWire.
Now what devices do we
expect to start doing this?
Look at digital still cameras.
Today, you're already in the three,
four megapixel range,
and of course that's
probably going to increase.
But the files are getting
bigger and bigger and bigger.
Flash memory or smart media memory
is of course getting bigger.
When you plug your digital
camera into your Mac,
you want the pictures to
transfer as fast as possible,
especially when you've
got these huge files.
Scanners.
I was in Taiwan a couple of months ago
and talking to a big scanner company.
They're working on this new scanner.
They showed me a prototype.
I unfortunately can't mention the name.
But they had this same mechanism on
USB and the same mechanism on FireWire.
By the way, this is a consumer scanner.
The scan on USB is 600 DPI,
eight and a half by eleven inch scan.
It took about three minutes, three,
three and a half minutes or so.
On FireWire, the same scan took about
forty-seven seconds.
So there's a big difference
and we're starting to really
see customers understand it.
So customers want it now.
We have the systems out there,
so there's no reason for you not
to make your devices FireWire.
Talking about FireWire
in the PC market space,
of course you know that we
ship a whole lot of systems.
Earlier on I said 70% of our systems
now ship standard with FireWire.
You're seeing the same
trend in the PC space.
So from Apple,
we've done already about 3 million
systems last year with FireWire.
Each of them have two ports,
so there are like 6
million ports out there.
But in the PC space,
you're seeing big names like Compaq,
Gateway, Dell, Sony of course, Toshiba,
Panasonic, Sharp,
all these companies are now
jumping on the FireWire bandwagon.
Another interesting thing is
Taiwanese logic board makers are putting
FireWire standard on their logic boards.
Asus is one example.
So we're really seeing
the numbers increase.
I was talking to somebody at
Microsoft a couple of weeks ago,
and they're expecting that this year,
they'll see about 15 million PCs,
that's about 15% of the market space,
ship standard with FireWire.
So that's a big number.
If we could switch back to slides.
So now to get into the technology
details about FireWire,
I'd like to welcome Eric Anderson.
Eric is our lead engineer on FireWire
and is the software manager for
all of core FireWire development.
Eric.
Thanks, Jai.
Thanks, everybody.
Okay, we've talked about FireWire
for many years here at WWDC.
I'm sure many of you know
it's been a long time coming,
but as Jai's explained,
it's really a mainstream technology now.
It's in most of our products,
and the number is rising every
time we introduce a new product.
So what I'm going to talk about
today is some of the basics
of the FireWire hardware,
especially,
that will hopefully help you to
understand what FireWire can really do,
how it works,
and what features it has that are
suitable for developing a product.
If you're going to make
a FireWire product,
you definitely need to know this.
If you're developing for Mac in general,
I hope this will be helpful in
understanding what FireWire can
do and how you might develop
to be friendly for FireWire.
Okay, first of all,
the name of this standard is
IEEE 1394 High Performance Serial Bus.
FireWire is just a word.
It's a trademark that's owned by Apple,
but it's just a word.
It's not an implementation.
It's not a different spec.
You're all welcome to use this
trademark if you license it from Apple.
The trademark license is completely free.
Just talk to Jai.
There's no difference
between FireWire and 1394.
1394 is a serial bus,
and that means exactly what it says.
It's serial.
This works best for longer cables.
Parallel is better for short distances.
And as a result, we have a very thin,
friendly, easy-to-use cable because
there's only a few wires in it.
And it's a bus.
This means that when you send a packet,
it goes to every device on the bus.
This is really important for high
speed and low cost when you have
a moderate number of devices.
Okay, this is a diagram that shows
the hardware used in FireWire.
I'm going to describe this briefly,
then I'll go into the details
on each part and then come
back to this diagram later.
What I've shown in this diagram
are three typical FireWire devices.
Of course, the Macintosh,
that's the most important on the left,
a FireWire disk drive in the center,
like Jai demonstrated,
and a FireWire camera on the right,
like a digital video camcorder,
like the millions that
are available today.
I'm going to start at the
bottom and talk about the PHY.
This is the chip that actually drives
the signals on the FireWire bus.
Then I'll talk about the link layer,
which is where knowledge of packets,
checksums, headers,
and so on takes place.
And then the communications up to
the higher levels of the device,
which will differ depending on what
kind of device this actually is.
Okay, the PHY chip,
PHY stands for physical layer.
This is silicon that actually implements
the electrical protocol for FireWire.
FireWire is a low-voltage
differential signaling interface
that uses a 200 millivolt signal.
This is important because
it's very low power,
which keeps it cheap and
makes it easy to go fast.
The PHY will have one transmitter
and one receiver for each port,
which corresponds to a socket for a
FireWire plug on the device that contains
these transmitters and receivers.
Because FireWire is low voltage,
the cables are fairly short.
There's a limit of about 15
feet to a FireWire cable.
After more than 15 feet,
200 millivolts starts to look
more like zero millivolts,
and that doesn't work very well.
So FireWire is definitely
not a local area network.
You might think of it as a room
area network or a desk area network,
but it's not, for most people,
a good choice for trying to
implement a local area network.
The PHY actually implements a
series of point-to-point links.
Each FireWire cable represents a
single serial communication path.
There's no electrical continuity
between the ports on FireWire
because each PHY will regenerate
the signal that comes in one port
and send it out all the other ports.
It's important to know that this
is completely done in hardware,
which means there's no
burden on the software,
and there's also no chance for
the software to get in there and
either mess this up or slow it down.
At this level, FireWire is always a bus.
Every packet will go to every device.
There's no buffering, there's no routing.
These things make it fast, cheap,
and simple.
So there's a variety of
PHY silicon available.
The key features that
distinguish a PHY are the
number of ports that it offers,
which is how many FireWire
connectors the device can have,
and the speed that the
PHY can operate at.
FireWire defines three speeds for
operation with FireWire cables,
which are 100, 200,
and 400 megabits per second.
The digital video camcorders available
generally use the 100 megabit PHY speed,
because this is what was available in
1995 when these products were introduced,
and this is plenty fast
enough for a camcorder.
All of the products that we sell
use the 400 megabit interface,
because this is much better for
hard disk drives and gives you
far more bandwidth to work with.
But FireWire is a mix-and-match bus.
You can connect devices of
different speeds any way you like,
and they will automatically
work out the fastest speed
that they can communicate at.
In the picture I showed where there
was a disk drive and a camera,
if we need to send a
packet to the camera,
of course we'll send it at 100 megabits,
because that's the only
speed the camera can receive.
But if we want to communicate
with the disk drive,
or if it wants to send data back to us,
this can happen at 400
megabits per second.
That packet won't be
received by the camera,
but that's okay,
because the camera doesn't
need to see that packet anyway.
So multiple speeds can operate
simultaneously on FireWire.
This is very convenient.
The next layer up from
the PHY is the link layer.
This is the layer that
knows what packets are.
It knows how to assemble a packet,
how to arrange the header,
how to compute the CRC,
and it contains buffering for preparing
a packet before it goes out or
absorbing a packet when one comes in.
And importantly,
this is where the bus ends.
All packets come into the link,
but the link will examine them and decide
which packets are actually important for
the device that it's in and pass only the
important packets up to the controller.
Generally speaking,
the link layer will have DMA so that it
can efficiently move data into or out
of the device that it's connected to.
There's lots of link silicon available
to choose from in designing products.
The key features that
differentiate it are the packet
formats that it can support.
The computer can use the packet
format to support the packet format.
The computer needs to
speak all packet formats,
but a device like a camcorder
or a hard drive may get by
with only some packet formats,
and considerable simplicity can
be had in the link by limiting it
to the formats that are needed.
The DMA in a link may vary
depending on the application,
and the host interface may vary as well.
A camcorder link typically would have
an 8-bit microcontroller interface,
very simple,
very good for a one-function device,
whereas in the Macintosh,
we have a complex PCI interface
that's very high-tech.
So it's a very simple interface.
And it's also a very
complex PCI interface.
The PCI interface is a little bit
more complex than the PCI interface.
It's a little bit more complex
than the PCI interface,
and it's a little bit more
complex than the PCI interface.
It's a little bit more complex
than the PCI interface.
interface that's very high performance.
All of our products today use the
1394 Open Host Controller Interface.
This is an industry-standard
link interface for computers
that's very powerful.
It can send or receive every legal
kind of packet on the FireWire bus,
and depending how you count,
it has 16 or more independently
programmable DMAs optimized for the
various different kinds of packets that
can be sent or received on FireWire.
So let's talk about these
packets that go across the bus.
There's two primary kinds of packets
for moving data that I will talk about,
and there's a few others that are
used for management operations.
Asynchronous packets,
or non-real-time packets,
are used for devices like disk drives.
Each packet contains a small amount of
data from one byte up to two kilobytes,
depending on the speed that it's
being sent at and the amount of
data needed by the application.
An asynchronous packet is
addressed by a node ID,
which identifies one other
device on the FireWire bus,
and a memory address.
These two together make
up a 64-bit address space.
The memory address is 48 bits,
and it selects where in the destination
node the packet is being sent to.
What exactly these memory addresses mean
may depend on what kind of device you're
using or what protocol you're speaking.
On the Macintosh, if that 48-bit address
is less than 4 billion,
meaning that the top
16 bits are all zero,
then it simply identifies a physical
memory address inside Macintosh memory.
This can be used by a hard disk
drive to directly move data into or
out of buffers on the Mac without
any involvement by software,
which is tremendous for
performance because this data
can flow without interrupts,
without software latencies.
In fact, the CPU can be used for
something else during this time.
Addresses above the 4-gigabyte range do
not go to physical memory because there
can't be memory at such a high address.
Those do go to software,
and those cause an
interrupt when they arrive.
Software will examine
the packet that came in,
figure out what it's supposed to mean,
and take corresponding action.
So, for example,
with a FireWire hard drive,
we might ask the drive to
move one megabyte of data.
We might ask it to read that data
and put it in Macintosh memory.
It will get the data from the medium,
break that up typically into 512 packets,
each of which is 2K.
It will send those across FireWire
to the different addresses in
Macintosh physical memory where we
specified that we want the data.
All of that will happen without
causing any interrupts or
without any software overhead.
When the data is entirely in place,
the drive will send one additional
packet to some address off
the end of physical memory.
This will cause an interrupt
that software will notice.
Then software will learn by examining
the packet that the I/O is complete.
So this is extremely efficient.
It supports multiple devices at once.
It means that data can flow in and out of
the Mac at very high speeds on FireWire.
Again,
I want to stress that FireWire is a bus,
which means that when we send an
asynchronous packet to one node,
electrically it will go to all nodes,
but all except one will
look at the address and say,
"That's not me," and they won't
bother processing the packet.
The one that does receive the packet
will check the CRC on that packet,
and if it's received correctly
without overflowing the
buffer or any other problem,
will send an acknowledgement
that indicates the packet
was received correctly.
So with asynchronous transmit,
you always know that your data made it,
or in the rare case
when it doesn't make it,
you can send another copy.
Asynchronous packets generally
look like memory accesses.
Most packets sent asynchronously
are either read or write
requests on the FireWire bus.
A packet requesting a read simply
specifies the number of bytes
that it wants and an address
that it would like to read from.
This is a very small packet,
but this will cause a response
to be sent that contains all of
those bytes that were requested,
so this will be a fairly large packet.
This is fully symmetric.
Any node can read from any other node.
Also, any node can initiate a write
operation by sending a packet
that specifies an address,
the length of the data,
and actually includes the payload,
up to 2 kilobytes of data in that packet.
The receiving node,
if it absorbs that write correctly,
will simply send an acknowledgement
that says the packet got through okay,
or an acknowledgement that
says something went wrong and
please send the packet again.
As I described in the disk drive case,
often these packets can be sent
with a response with no interrupts,
and this frees up the CPU to
do other useful things.
The other kind of packet commonly used
on FireWire is an isochronous packet.
This is used for real-time transfers,
such as when a DV camcorder is sending
digital video into the Macintosh.
These packets are also
a small chunk of data,
although the size range is twice
as big as for asynchronous packets.
Isochronous packets are
sent at fixed intervals.
8,000 times per second,
there's an opportunity to
send an isochronous packet.
This is not configurable.
This is just a number that
Mike Teener picked 10 years ago,
and this is what we use.
What's special about Isochronous is that
the hardware enforces a guarantee that
says 8,000 times a second the bus will be
available only for the people who have a
reservation to send Isochronous packets.
This means that the packets will go
out on time and they won't get held off
because disk drives or something else
are hammering the bus asynchronously.
There may be a small delay
while you wait for whoever's
currently talking to shut up,
but then the Isochronous
packets will all get to flow.
Again, FireWire is a bus,
so the isochronous
packets go to every node,
but they're not addressed
like asynchronous packets.
They're not sent to one node.
Instead,
the header of an isochronous packet
contains a channel number that specifies
one out of 64 possible channels.
And each node can examine this
and decide if it wants to receive
data on that channel or not.
For example,
the open host control interface
that we use can be configured to
receive four different isochronous
channels simultaneously,
and programmed with buffers for
where to store that data in memory.
The isochronous packets are
not sent to a memory address.
Instead, the meaning of one packet after
the next is protocol-dependent,
based on what time they arrive
or what order they arrive in.
There's no time travel
on the FireWire bus.
Packets will arrive in the
order that they're sent.
It's also important to note that
isochronous packets are not acknowledged.
Because two or more nodes
might receive this packet,
there's no simple way for
each one of them to indicate
whether it arrived or not.
Also, because it's real-time,
there's no time available to retransmit
the packet if anything went wrong.
So in principle,
data can be lost in isochronous transfer.
But the bit error rate on
FireWire is phenomenally low.
So low that in practice,
it's perfectly realistic to use
this for professional digital video
editing or for watching TV or for MLan
without any concern about data loss.
Data loss really is not a problem
in a properly designed system.
Of course,
you do need to wire it up correctly.
So let's come back to
this hardware diagram,
and I'll talk a little bit more
about what's happening in the system.
Let's suppose that the
Macintosh here on the right,
I hope you can see the cursor up there,
wants to send a packet to the
camera to tell the camera to start
playing the tape that's in there.
The Macintosh will select the
command bytes that indicate play and
send those across PCI to the link.
The link layer will form this up
into a packet by computing a checksum
and properly arranging the bytes.
And when it's already in a buffer
or a FIFO to be sent out on the bus,
the link will tell the PHY that it
wants to arbitrate for the permission
to transmit on the FireWire bus.
Often, this permission will be granted
immediately because the bus is idle.
There might be a delay of up
to 100 microseconds if the
bus is heavily congested.
When the PHY wins arbitration,
it will tell the link
to start transmitting,
and the link will send the
packet down to the PHY,
which will then send the packet
serially out each of its ports.
So our command to the camera
telling it to play would first
flow over to the disk drive.
The PHY here will receive the
packet and do two things with it.
It will send the packet
up to the link layer,
because the PHY doesn't
know who this packet is for,
and it will retransmit the
packet on all of its other ports,
except the port the
packet's arriving from.
So this is important.
The PHY does not have any buffer,
and it doesn't have any routing tables.
It simply sends the packet
everywhere instantly.
Because this is a bus,
nobody else could be talking anyway.
In the disk drive,
the link layer will examine the packet.
Even though it arrived at 100 megabits,
it will still look at it.
It will see that it's intended for
somebody else and just ignore it.
So the controller isn't bothered with
any information about this packet.
But the packet does flow
out into the camera,
whose PHY also receives it,
passes it up to the camera,
and then passes it up to the link layer,
which recognizes that this packet
is intended for the camera.
The link then does two things.
It passes the packet
up to the controller,
which processes the packet
and starts the tape playing.
Also, the link signals an acknowledgment
to the PHY that says this
packet was received correctly.
And that acknowledgment flows back
through these PHYs to everyone,
but only the Macintosh who sent
the packet is looking for it,
and then notes that the
transmission was successful and
signals this back up to software.
of devices on the FireWire bus.
A couple other things
I'd like to talk about.
The automatic configuration in FireWire.
One of the big advantages that
we tout for customers is that
FireWire is plug-and-play.
You just plug things in.
There's no SCSI IDs to set.
There's no terminators.
That's because there's enough
information provided by the hardware
that we can hide all of that.
Of course,
there still are node numbers that
identify the nodes on the bus.
They're simply hidden and
selected automatically.
On a bus with three nodes,
the nodes will simply be numbered 0, 1,
and 2.
What order this happens in may be random.
It may depend on how the
cables are connected.
It may depend on various factors.
It can also change over time.
If devices are added or removed,
we're going to have
to change the numbers,
especially if one of the
low-numbered devices gets removed.
That all happens
automatically in the hardware.
We don't get involved in that.
But what the FireWire software layer
does is it hides these changes.
Device drivers don't need to know
the node number of their devices.
They simply use a handle
to refer to the device,
and our FireWire layer keeps
everything straight so the
packets go to the right place.
If you really do need
to know your number,
we provide an APA to find out,
but most software won't
need to know this.
And you'd never want to show
a number like this to the user
because it may change at any time,
and it really doesn't
mean anything to them.
Every FireWire device
has a configuration ROM.
This is a small ROM that
describes what the device does.
The ROM is located at a fixed address
that's standard for every device.
So when a new device is plugged in,
we simply send a FireWire read
request to that address to get
the ROM and find out what it is.
You might notice that this address is
way off the end of physical memory,
so this is not going to collide
with any Macintosh address.
What's in the ROM describes the
features of that particular device,
what protocol that device speaks,
may have other useful information,
like the ID of the vendor
who sold the device.
We use this information
to figure out which device
driver to load for the device.
The ROM also contains a
globally unique identifier,
a GUID.
This is a serial number that's 64 bits
long that uniquely identifies a device.
This is critical because if you plug
in two VST FireWire hard drives,
the contents of the ROM other
than this GUID are identical.
If the node numbers change,
we might forget which drive is which.
That could be really bad if
you have files on those drives.
So it's critical that every device
has a truly unique serial number.
So what's happened recently in FireWire?
As I mentioned earlier,
we have the 1394 open host controller
interface in all of our products today.
This is a second generation
host controller interface that
provides very powerful DMA,
has provided us with a
big performance boost,
and has a lot of capacity that will
take us forward over the years.
All products today that have
FireWire ports can boot from
a FireWire hard disk drive.
I'll talk more about that.
Last year we said that we'd
provide FireWire power in
desktop and consumer products,
but probably not in PowerBooks.
Turns out we figured out how to do that.
The new PowerBook with FireWire
provides six watts of power,
just like the iMac.
That's plenty of power to run a hard
disk or another small peripheral.
The IEEE 1394A standard
was recently ratified.
It's been several years in the works,
but it is absolutely
finished and voted on.
This is a standard that provides a lot of
cleanup over the original 1394 standard.
It fixes bugs,
it clarifies a lot of things that
really weren't described very well.
It has some modest optimizations,
but it's not a big leap
forward in performance.
But it's very important if you're
designing products to use 1394A silicon.
All the vendors who sell
FireWire parts are offering
silicon compliant with 1394A.
You'll have much better interoperability
with other devices and with the
Mac if you use this modern silicon
that complies with this standard.
IEEE 1394B is the effort to
define 800 megabit FireWire,
even higher speeds,
and a variety of other useful
features like plastic optical
fiber for certain applications,
protocols that can be used
for wireless FireWire,
and various other advances.
1394B recently passed its
initial round of balloting.
This basically commits the
team to stop adding features
and start debugging the spec.
So it will be a number of
months more while they actually
agree on how everything should
work and how to describe it.
But it is moving toward completion,
and of course we're looking
forward to adopting that technology
as soon as it's available.
I was quite surprised when I wrote the
slides for this year to notice that we
were talking about USB 2.0 last year.
There really isn't anything
new to say about USB 2.0.
It's still not there.
I think Jai is going to rag on it later,
so I'll skip it for now.
So let's talk about FireWire booting.
Every product that we sell today that
has a FireWire port can boot from
a FireWire hard disk on that port.
That includes the Power Mac G4,
the iMac DV, and the PowerBook FireWire.
Older products that we already
sold cannot boot from FireWire.
Sorry.
If you try to copy the
software onto the old product,
you'll find it still
can't boot from FireWire.
So I want to prevent some
confusion and save you some time.
Don't bother.
The Firewire services on these new
products are included in the MacOS ROM.
This is because prior to that,
we included them in extensions,
and we can't load an extension from
a device that we can't talk to.
So the Firewire services are
built into the MacOS ROM.
However, the copy in the MacOS ROM will
only be used if we actually
boot from a Firewire device.
In any other case,
we will load the extensions normally.
This means that you can upgrade those
extensions with a newer version,
such as Firewire 2.4,
which I'll talk about later.
So you're not locked into it in the ROM.
However, Apple can ship a new MacOS ROM,
such as was included in
the recent MacOS posting.
So we can improve the
booting if we need to.
This means that you should always
have the FireWire extensions
in the extensions folder,
even though it's also
included in the ROM.
Also,
the extensions cannot override the ROM.
Basically, we tried and that turned
out to be awfully hard,
so for now at least,
when you do boot from FireWire,
you'll be using the version
that's in the MacOS ROM.
How do you boot from FireWire?
It's really very simple.
You just go to the startup
disk control panel,
pick your FireWire disk, and reboot.
Now, if you try to do this,
you might find that you can't pick your
disk in the startup disk control panel.
This means that the driver software
that came with that disk doesn't
yet know how to boot from FireWire.
But our vendors have
been working on this,
and new software should be available
to make disks bootable from FireWire.
When a disk is bootable from FireWire,
the driver for that disk should
be stored in a boot partition
on the media of the disk.
This works the same as how
we boot from SCSI or ATA or
I think everything except USB.
This is so we can load the driver.
We can't load an extensions-based driver
when booting from FireWire because
we can't see the extensions folder
when we're trying to find the disk.
So third-party formatting software
that supports booting will put their
driver in a partition on the disk.
Now if for some reason we fail to find
a third-party partition on the disk,
we will use a built-in Apple driver so
that you can try to access your data.
But this driver may not support
the disk that you have very well,
or it may be slow.
So we highly recommend that you get the
third-party driver and for you third
parties that you provide this driver so
that you can provide the best performance
and features and support to your
customers who are using FireWire booting.
Another new feature we
have is Target Disk Mode.
This is a lot like SCSI Disk Mode.
For some reason,
we didn't call it FireWire Disk Mode.
But it lets you use the
PowerBook FireWire like
a FireWire hard disk.
If you reboot the computer and
simply hold down the letter "T"
until you see a big FireWire logo,
which should be about five seconds,
the computer will act
like a FireWire disk.
And you can plug it into any other
Macintosh and it will show up
on the desktop through FireWire.
This actually is implemented
in all current products.
It's probably most
useful in the PowerBook,
but you can use an iMac DV or a
PowerMac G4 in target disk mode,
and that may be a convenient way
for you to get files on or off
of that machine over FireWire.
Note that... Thanks.
This capability is actually
implemented in open firmware,
so I can't take very much
of the credit for this,
but I'm glad to hear that
you're happy about it.
Note that you do not
need a special cable.
In SCSI Disk Mode,
you didn't hold down a key,
you used a special cable, because SCSI,
for practical purposes,
is not peer-to-peer,
so normally you wouldn't connect two
computers together by the SCSI port.
For FireWire,
it's perfectly okay to do that,
so the normal cable is used,
you have to hold down the
letter "T" so that we know
that you want to use Disk Mode.
On the other Mac,
which is running MacOS,
you will need FireWire 2.3.3,
or a later version,
in order to see the FireWire disk.
That's because this version
of FireWire has the driver for
an Apple Target Disk Mode disk
built into it.
Okay, FireWire 2.4 was declared
GM on Monday of this week,
and as soon as we can get
the installer working,
we'll make that available to everybody.
We expect that to be
just a couple more days.
2.4 is bug fixes and
performance tuning only.
I'm sure you've gotten the message
by now that MacOSX is the future,
and most of our staff are now
working on MacOSX FireWire.
Tomorrow, we'll have a presentation
from William Gulland,
who has done a terrific job in
implementing MacOSX FireWire.
He'll tell you all about it.
He'll also be here today
for the Q&A period.
So FireWire 2.4 is just bug
fixes and performance tuning.
In particular,
disk drive performance should be
useably faster on most systems.
Write performance
especially will benefit.
What we've really done here is raise
the ceiling for how fast it can go.
So if you have a fast disk
or one of those VST RAIDs,
you'll see a big performance.
If you have a FireWire ZIP drive,
we probably weren't
holding it back anyway,
so this change may not
make it any faster.
Another interesting thing in
FireWire 2.4 is that if you have the
PowerBook FireWire and you install 2.4,
you'll find that your
battery lasts longer.
I can't say exactly how much,
but it should be about
5 to 10 percent longer.
What we do is, if you have no FireWire
devices connected,
we simply turn off the
FireWire circuitry,
which is fairly complicated circuitry,
and we save a useful amount
of power by doing that.
If you then plug in a FireWire device,
we'll turn it back on.
It might take a couple of
seconds for us to notice,
but it always works in our tests.
What did Steve say in the keynote?
Trust me, you'll love this.
Okay, this will be available by
software update in MacOS 9.
If you just go to the software update
control panel within a few days,
you should start to see
FireWire 2.4 listed there.
And it will also be available
on the web if you'd prefer to
download it and install it manually.
There will be a FireWire 2.5,
even though we're mostly
focused on MacOSX,
simply because, I hate to say this,
but we do have a few more bugs.
So we will work on those.
We may be able to improve the
performance a little bit more.
If there are bugs that are affecting
your ability to develop products,
by all means, let us know about it.
Jai will talk later about how to
contact us about our mailing list.
We will try to fix bugs for FireWire 2.5.
That will be out sometime this summer.
That will be made available through the
software update mechanism in MacOS 9.
Okay,
next I'd like to bring up Wil Oxford,
who's going to talk about MLan,
which is audio on FireWire.
Wil?
Thanks, Eric.
Not sure how long this leash is here,
so I might not get to
move around too much here.
So,
the title of this session is FireWire:
What is the title?
Now and the Future.
So I want to talk a little bit about
some of the future developments
that we're going to be pushing
out towards the end of the summer.
You should know that the M-LAN spec is
still undergoing some slight changes,
but basically it's very
solid at this point.
I don't know how many of
you are familiar with M-LAN,
so I'll just go into a little
bit of detail about M-LAN itself.
Oops, backwards.
So this is the outline.
This is really intended just to be
a very short introduction to MLan.
We'll get into some
more details later on,
especially with William's
session tomorrow,
which I encourage you to go to.
And also there's going to be
a session later on this week,
that's Friday afternoon,
to talk about multi-channel
audio and that kind of stuff.
So definitely I encourage you
to go to both of those sessions.
So basically what is
FireWire Audio or MLan?
And so the idea here is that
MLan is just a sub-protocol,
if you will,
of the FireWire protocol itself.
So MLan was actually invented by Yamaha,
and they were very gracious
in providing that service,
opening it up to the rest
of the FireWire community.
So we have them to thank for that.
Basically what MLan is,
is a sub-class of... The IEC 61883 spec,
which really doesn't necessarily...
Something you have to remember,
other than we call them ABC devices,
and that's audio/video control devices.
The 61883 spec is actually a
sub-class of the FireWire spec,
the 1394 spec.
The 61883 spec actually
comes in six flavors,
if you will.
It's a little bit different from
the books to the specifications,
six sections.
The MLan protocol is
described in the section 6,
the final section of the spec.
So if you look at the
family of FireWire devices,
there is the overall umbrella,
1394 umbrella.
And then you can divide
that up into ABC devices,
or 61883 devices,
and other FireWire devices,
such as mass storage devices, scanners.
You've seen all the other
things that Jay's talked about.
Within the ABC device category,
then we have yet another sub-class,
which is the MLan devices,
or the -6 devices, and other ABC devices.
And these include DV camcorders,
AV hard drives, which some of you may
know a little bit about.
But basically the key to know here
is that MLan effectively is 61883-6,
just like FireWire
effectively is IEEE 1394.
So, what exactly is--what exactly is the
How does it fit into the data format?
Those of you who care about how
this all fits together on the bus,
I'm not sure that the lines actually
came out very well on the slide,
so I apologize for that.
But you remember Eric talked
earlier about isochronous
and asynchronous packets.
Well, if you look at 1883 spec,
most of the data is actually
transferred in isochronous packets.
There are some control packets
that are sent asynchronously,
but mostly isochronous.
And so what I've got here on the left
is just a isochronous packet header,
just a schematic of that.
Isochronous packet, sorry.
And the isochronous packet
is divided into three fields.
There's the packet header,
which indicates things like
what kind of packet it is,
also how long the packet is,
and that kind of thing.
And then there's a data field.
And then at the bottom is a little CRC.
So again, I apologize for the fact that
they didn't quite come out.
But anyway, sort of imagine, as I point.
Inside that data field for
the isochronous packet,
then that's where the MLan
packet actually resides.
And so the MLan packet
has yet another header.
It's actually an ABC packet, sorry.
The packet itself has another header,
which is the SIP header,
or common isochronous packet header.
And then below that, optionally,
are a set of data fields or more headers.
And basically,
it's just to try to explain
to you that it all fits
within the isochronous packet.
So, why MLan?
Why should you care?
Well, MLan, to me,
is one of the most exciting
developments in digital audio
since the original AES/EBU spec.
And the reason it's so
exciting to me is because,
basically, it has all the great
things about FireWire.
All the really great
things about FireWire,
basically, number one,
is it's a single bus.
So, you don't,
it's not a point-to-point thing.
You can daisy-chain your devices.
You don't have to worry
about inputs and outputs.
It has lots and lots of bandwidth.
So, just as an example, you know,
400 megabits per second,
you can get hundreds, literally hundreds,
of 96 kilohertz, 24-bit audio channels.
And those of you who care about that
kind of thing should think that's
actually a pretty adequate number.
We could do things like
hot-plugging devices,
so you don't have to worry too much
about powering down your internet.
You can do that in an entire studio
before you start the moving connections,
that kind of thing.
So, the integration, the other,
one of the other advantages
is the integration of video,
MIDI, and AES/EBU all in a single wire.
So, basically,
if you've ever been into a large
studio setup and you see all these
enormous patch bays and MIDI patch bays,
which are electrical devices
that do the same kind of thing,
and video and audio connections that
are run together and then split apart,
and then there's synchronizers.
Basically,
this is going to make life a lot easier.
It's not going to solve all
the problems in the world,
but it's certainly going to make
life a lot easier as far as keeping
audio and video signals synchronous,
routing them from one place
to another in the studio.
And for me, the biggest deal here is the
illumination of the studio patch bay.
And I don't know how many of
you have killed your fingers
on the backside of patch bays,
but, yeah, those of you who are clapping,
yeah.
So, I have more cuts and bruises on
my knuckles from patch bay work.
And I'm rewiring.
And it's certainly the largest single
contributor to studio downtime,
I think.
So, the disadvantages are,
and of course there
always are disadvantages.
For now, there are some issues
with clock recovery.
Right now,
it's sort of a highly contested field
as to exactly what the best kind of
jitter of respect that you're going to
be able to get with unmodified FireWire.
But for now,
I think my perspective on it,
and don't take this as gospel.
Certainly go out and
find out for yourself.
But FireWire as it stands today is good
enough for almost all applications.
And it's only the ultimate,
really highest end, you know,
$8,000 A to D converter kind of market
where it really is going to matter,
the clock jitter, as it stands today.
We are working on that in the
1394 Trade Association and also
in the AES standards committees.
And I think that before long,
we'll have some good work to do.
And then after long,
we'll have some method figured
out where that really won't
be a concern for the future.
There are still some
clarifications of the spec,
as I mentioned earlier.
But those are well underway.
And I expect that before we --
certainly before we meet next year,
everything will be
pretty much ironed out.
So how do you use it in your
application if you're a software writer?
And the good news here is you
don't have to worry about that.
We're going to take care of that for you.
We'll use it just as any standard
sound in or out device or both.
One of the things you probably want
to know about is OS X versus OS 9.
To my knowledge, at this point,
we are going to do simultaneous
OS 9 and OS X releases.
It'll be later on in the summer.
As far as OS 9, how you use it,
it's the standard SDEV on the output
side and the sound input device.
So you really don't need to
change your app in any way to
take advantage of FireWire unless
you're adding new features that
FireWire allows you to have.
On the OS X side,
I highly encourage you to talk to both
William Gullen or attend William Gullen's
talk and also Jeff Moore's talk on
multichannel audio and that architecture.
All that stuff will be
gone into in great detail.
If you insist on rolling your own driver,
we certainly can help to some extent.
We're looking at the open source issues.
Certainly for OS X,
we believe that's the right thing
to do and we just need to make
sure we can legally do that with
all the licenses and whatnot.
For OS 9, I'm not clear right now whether
that'll be open source or not.
But certainly we can help you
out even if we're not going to
be giving you all our sources.
So what does the device
roadmap look like?
Well, right now, this summer,
we will see the first
M-LAN devices available.
In fact, you'll see a couple of
them sitting right up here.
Right now,
they're really only sound output devices,
meaning they're speakers or
things that actually generate
sound from a digital signal,
generate audio from a digital signal.
Sort of towards the end
of summer or early fall,
we should see a second wave of
M-LAN devices on the market.
And I don't want to
pre-announce anyone's product,
but basically,
we're looking at several different
chipsets available and several
products based on those chipsets also.
So we're looking at audio in
and out and MIDI in and out
devices in that time frame.
And those of you who are looking to
develop hardware devices like that,
certainly get in touch with our fine
team of developer support people.
And then, towards the end of this year,
sort of the Christmas selling season,
if you will, we expect to see the
first consumer devices,
first consumer M-LAN devices.
And as I put up there,
I think then the fun really begins.
First of all, if you're a developer
or a hardware developer,
what's great about that is that
the volume for consumer devices
is just enormous compared to the
sort of semi-pro music market.
And so, if you're a developer
or a hardware developer,
what's great about that is that
the volume for consumer devices
is just enormous compared to the
sort of semi-pro music market.
And so, if you're a developer
or a hardware developer,
what's great about that is that
the volume for consumer devices
is just enormous compared to the
sort of semi-pro music market.
And so,
with all the silicon being generated,
the price will go down quite a bit.
Also, the consumer devices
tend to have a lot more,
well, there'll be a lot more shelf
appeal because they'll be
in every circuit city and,
you know, Best Buy, whatever,
around the country.
So, M-LAN devices will actually start to,
I think, exponentially grow sort of
towards the end of the year.
To me, that's really exciting because,
for the first time, I think,
we're going to have a lot of new devices.
For the first time,
and I think one of the, if I recall,
one of the early
discussions on the 1394 TA,
the Trade Association website,
there was an absolutely concerted
effort to make sure that this was
a spec which was clear across both
consumer and professional applications.
And to me, that's very exciting
because always in the past,
we've had this sort of imaginary line,
if you will,
between professional or semi-pro,
equipment and consumer equipment.
And they didn't always talk
together correctly or there was
some sort of protocol difference.
And we've been very careful to make
sure that M-LAN is a completely
cross-boundary application,
protocol.
Basically, you shouldn't have any problem
connecting up an M-LAN consumer
device like your home stereo,
home theater, or a television set to
a professional device.
They should be able to talk together.
And they should be able to
talk together quite well.
So for me, that's very exciting because
it opens up a whole lot of new
applications and the market is just
much larger than if you fragment it.
So what I'm going to do now is
just give a real quick M-LAN demo.
Those of you who attended the hardware
keynote saw pretty much the same demo.
So I will tell you,
this is running under OS 9 right now.
I don't have an OS 10 demo set up.
But bear with me.
So if you can switch
over to the number 2,
please.
Number two, please.
Great.
OK, so the first thing I want to
show you is just if you go
into the sound control panel,
Then you'll see that the FireWire,
as I mentioned before,
M-Lan FireWire shows up as just
a standard sound output device.
And those of you who can hear it up here,
these speakers are not probably
loud enough to get all the
way to the back of the hall,
but we'll try.
So what I want to do then
basically is just show you...
if I can find the demo...
Just a standard SoundJam MP.
Just, again,
if you saw the hardware keynote,
you saw this.
But, I don't know if you guys
can hear that or not,
but...
So there's no difference really
as far as the OS knows between
the standard built-in sound
hardware and the MLan demo,
so the MLan speaker.
So you really, again, just to reiterate,
your application really doesn't
need to know anything about MLan
in order to take advantage of it.
Okay, so that's pretty much all
I wanted to talk about.
We can bring Jai back up and answer
or go on to the resources side.
Thanks.
Thanks, Wil.
We really think that
M-Lan is going to be cool,
especially in the consumer
electronics space.
Just think about consumers wiring
their home stereo systems with
wires running all over the place.
FireWire will make it so much easier,
just one cable going all
over the place and bam,
you're ready to go.
So to talk a little
bit about resources...
We have an SDK available for all
developers on the developer seat site.
Go up there, get it,
and start doing development.
That has all the necessary
documentation and everything else.
We have a free FireWire mailing
list for you to subscribe.
So if you have technical
questions and want to post them,
of course you can ask DTS.
But there's a good community
of FireWire developers,
and we've set up this website.
You should post your questions there.
All our DTS engineers that do FireWire,
all our engineers that do FireWire,
are subscribed to this list.
And they will answer your questions.
Other developers are
subscribed to this list.
So this is a good community where
you can post your questions,
and usually I've seen that
people respond pretty quick.
If you have general
questions on FireWire,
send them to FireWire@apple.com.
They all come to me.
I try and respond pretty quick,
so you should hear from me pretty soon.
So there was some confusion some time
ago regarding FireWire licensing.
There was this big hoo-ha about a
dollar report and everybody's saying,
"Oh, we can't do it,
we can't do it." So we
worked on it a little bit.
There's a new patent pool
established for FireWire licensing,
and it's really, really simple.
That was the idea.
What happened is that previously
when a developer or a silicon maker
needed a patent license for FireWire,
he had to go to each
company that owned patents,
right?
Because there are several companies
that own the patents on FireWire.
There's Apple, there's Sony, Toshiba,
and several others.
So previously you had to go to
each of these companies separately,
pay an amount,
and that amount was really dependent on
the type of patent and things like that.
Well, what we did is establish a
patent pool with the 3094 TA,
helped out a lot on that.
And the eight companies that
own the patents put their
essential patents in this pool.
So they threw it in the pool,
and now for a patent license,
you don't need to go to any
of these companies separately.
You don't even need to come to Apple.
You just go to the patent pool,
and it's really, really easy.
Every device you ship, you pay 25 cents,
period.
And it's also not per port.
It's per device.
Also, it's per system, right?
So think about it.
Let's say some future computer has
internal FireWire ports and uses
an internal FireWire hard drive
and has two external ports on it.
The system manufacturer
will yet pay 25 cents,
although he's using a FireWire
hard drive internally.
It's per system, not per port.
Also, it's paid for by the end developer,
not the silicon vendor.
And the reason we did this was
is that there is this effect
that when you charge the source,
every time it changes hands,
the price keeps increasing, right?
So the silicon vendor will
charge his distributor,
if he pays 25 cents,
he will charge 50 cents.
By the time it goes from the distributor
to the retailer from 50 cents,
it goes to a buck.
By the time it comes to the developer,
it's more than a buck.
By the time it comes to the customer,
it's like $5.
So we don't want that to happen.
So what we said is,
let's go to the end person
and charge 25 cents.
So it's now the end developer
that pays that 25 cents.
The patent pool is managed by
the 3094 licensing authority.
So you can go to the website.
It's 3094LA.com.
Go there.
They'll have all the details about how
you need to pay and all that good stuff.
So, but the idea here, it's really,
really easy.
Don't get confused about it.
If you have questions,
send me an email or send an
email to firewire@apple.com.
We'll be happy to take it up with
you and answer your questions.
So a couple of things that you should do.
I think one of the key
features of FireWire,
especially from a customer perspective,
is bus power.
Customers love the idea that
you can plug in a peripheral,
don't need to connect it to the wall,
just power it up, and you're ready to go.
Well, so that of course depends on the
type of peripherals that you have.
So for peripherals
that consume low power,
use this feature.
Our customers love it,
and it just makes life so much easier.
The iMac DV and the new PowerBook G3s
provide 6 watts of power.
Our professional desktops, that's the G3,
the blue and white G3 and the G4,
provide 15 watts of power.
But keep this in mind when
you're designing your products.
Now if your products
use more than 15 watts,
of course you have to be
plugged into the wall.
But if they don't,
also you should keep in mind that you
have to provide for optional power.
So that if the customer,
for whatever reason, needs to use,
let's say, a PCI card or a PC card that
doesn't provide any power,
your product should be optionally
powered so that you can plug
it into the wall and get power.
Take advantage of the
multi-host topology.
As Eric mentioned,
FireWire is a peer-to-peer network.
You can have multiple
computers on the same bus.
A couple of examples of products
that have taken advantage of this are
scanners and the Micronet SandCube.
This is really huge,
especially for scanners.
If you look at a typical
publishing environment,
you've got one scanning station,
a scanner attached to it.
Person goes to the scanning station,
does a scan,
then goes back to his computer
and copies it over the network.
That's a pain, right?
What you could have is in the
small work groups that typically
our design customers work in,
you can have multiple computers
connected to the same scanner.
You just scan straight from
the scanner to the computer.
The SandCube, of course,
is a low-cost fiber channel replacement,
and that's really cool.
The 3094A spec says that
when you're providing power,
you provide from 8 to 30 volts.
Make sure that your device
works under this requirement,
right?
We don't guarantee,
we just guarantee that it will
be between 8 and 30 volts,
and we guarantee the
amount of power we provide.
We don't guarantee exactly
what the voltage is.
We've seen some devices that
don't work in this case,
so make sure that you
follow the spec correctly.
We use the standard 6-pin connector
out the back of our systems.
These connectors are much more
reliable and durable than the 4-pin
connectors that you see on camcorders.
So please use the 6-pin connector.
Use 400 megabits PHYs
for all your devices,
especially when you're
daisy-chaining and things like that.
You don't want your 200
megabit PHY not to be able to
transmit a 400 megabit packet.
So that's really important.
On devices that are big,
use 2 or 3 connectors.
People like to daisy-chain FireWire.
They know FireWire as
a daisy-chainable bus,
so make use of that.
We know it's a couple of cents,
maybe a buck more expensive because you
have to add an additional connector,
but this is something that
our customers really like.
Eric mentioned earlier on,
use a unique GUID.
The GUID, that's a unique serial number.
He explained why,
saying that if you have two
VST drives with the same ID,
the Mac doesn't know how to defer,
and that would be bad.
The way the FireWire works is that
every device has a config ROM in it.
Don't use the minimal ROM.
Use the entire ROM and put information
about your device in there so that the
Mac appropriately knows how to deal
with your device when it's plugged
in so it can match the appropriate
drivers and things like that.
The FireWire logo.
Eric mentioned it earlier.
FireWire is an Apple trademark.
We license the name FireWire
and the FireWire logo,
the yellow Y-shaped logo,
for free to developers.
Use this.
In all our marketing materials,
we tell our customers,
"Buy FireWire devices." That's how
our customers know what to connect.
So don't call your devices iLink.
I mean, don't call your devices 3094.
You're just confusing the
customers more and more.
Call it FireWire.
It's free.
Use it.
Use the Mac logo.
When you walk on an island,
CompUSA or Fry's or whatever,
how do you know which
device works on the Mac?
Well, you don't.
I mean, you don't want to pick
up each and every box,
look at it, and put it back in.
Use this logo.
That's how the customers identify
that this device works on the Mac.
In fact,
CompUSA has gone to the extent of
telling us to tell you folks to put this
Mac logo on all the six faces of the box,
because sometimes they
stack the boxes like this,
sometimes it's like this,
sometimes it's vertical, any side.
Use the Mac logo.
Again,
a license to use the Mac logo is free.
Just go download the form, fill it in,
and fax it back, and you're ready to go.
Artwork for both the FireWire logo and
the Mac logo is available on the website.
If you have any problems getting to it,
drop me an email and
we'll take care of you.
So there are a couple of sessions
that you should really attend.
Tomorrow,
there's an important session on FireWire.
We go into deep technical details
about FireWire and MacOSX.
X is clearly the future for Apple.
So all of you doing devices,
it's time to start writing drivers,
or if you're creating new devices,
it's time to start working on MacOSX.
That's absolutely the way to go.
We have a feedback forum on
Friday for both USB and FireWire,
so come to that.
Tell us what you think.
If you can't attend that,
send me an email and we'd be
happy to exchange emails or send
post emails on the mailing list.
Tomorrow,
we've got a good surprise for you,
actually.
What we're going to do is,
you know that there's a party tomorrow
thrown by Apple on the Apple campus.
I think they're going to bus everybody
from here to the Apple campus.
I think it's at 7:00
or 7:30 in the evening.
What we're doing is we have a separate
part on the Apple campus itself where
we're going to have a FireWire plugfest.
So Eric and the testing team are going
to set up a couple of computers there.
You bring your devices.
If they're prototypes,
that's not a problem.
Bring your software.
They'll plug it in and they'll
see how the devices interconnect,
drink a lot of beer, and have fun,
basically.
We did it last time for USB, actually,
and that's when we broke the
127 device limit for USB.
For FireWire, again,
if you have questions,
you can email them to me directly or you
can email them to FireWire@apple.com.
The email comes to me.
Again, I try to be really good
about responding quickly.
Just email is the best
way to get a hold of us.
There's also Craig.
You can send email to Craig.
Again, send it to either of us and we'll
try our best to take care of you.